Whois:
Query and response protocol that gives you the information of domain registrant
and registrar. Available as the utility in Linux systems.
The important information that attackers look for: Email, registry expiry date, 
update date, registrant information
Attacks possible: domain hijacking, phishing, information gathering through 
social engineering
It is searcher for an object in a WHOIS database.WHOIS is a query and response protocol that is widely used for quering database that store registerd users of an internet resource,such as domain name or ip address
Options:
-h = HOST: Connect to WHOIS database host
-P = PORT: When connecting, connect to network
port. --help: Display help message & exit. a

Dig:
DIG command stands for Domain Information Groper. It is used for retrieving information. about DNS name servers. It is used by network administrators. It is used for verifying & trouble shooting DNS problems & to perform DNS lookups. Dig command replaces older tools such as nslookup & the host. Eg. dig www.google.com.

Traceroute:
traceroute command in Linux prints the route that a packet takes to reach the host. This command is useful when you want to know about the route and about all the hops that a packet takes.
eg: traceroute www.google.com

Nikto:Nikto is an open-source web server scanner which performs comprehensive tests against web servers for multiple items. You can use Nikto with any web servers like Apache, Nginx, IHS, OHS, Litespeed, and so on. Nikto can check for server configuration items such as the presence of multiple index files, HTTP server options, and will attempt to identify installed web servers and software. Items and plugins scanned by Nikto are frequently updated and can be automatically updated.
Installation: sudo apt-get install nikto
eg: nikto -h 128.199.222.244 

Dmitry:Dmitry is a free and open-source tool available on GitHub. The tool is used for information gathering. You can download the tool and install in your Kali Linux. Dmitry stands for DeepMagic Information Gathering Tool. It’s a command-line tool Using Dmitry tool You can collect information about the target, this information can be used for social engineering attacks. It can be used to gather a number of valuable pieces of information

Usages of Dmitry Tool :
Dmitry Tool can be used to search subdomains of the target.
Dmitry Tool can be used to find open ports of the target system.
Dmitry Tool can be used to perform TCP scan.
Dmitry Tool can be used with netcraft service to get the target information such as operating system, web server details, web host details, hosting service details, etc.
Dmitry Tool can be used with whois service to get the target information such as registered domain, name, address, the contact information of the person who registered it.
Dmitry Tool can be used to get email addresses that are associated with the domain of the target.